---
title: A Five-Stage Model of the Mental Activities
date: 2016-08-16
language: en
---

# A Five-Stage Model of the Mental Activities

by Stuart E. Dreyfus and Hubert L. Drefus

## Abstract

In acquiring a skill by means of instruction and experience, the student
normally passes through five developmental stages which we designate novice,
competence, proficiency, expertise and mastery. We argue, based on analysis of
careful descriptions of skill acquisition, that as the student becomes skilled
he depends less on abstract principles and more on concrete experience. We
systematize and illustrate the progressive changes in a performer's ways of
seeing his task environment. We conclude that any skill-training procedure must
be based on some model of skill acquisition, so that it can address, at each
stage of training, the appropriate issues involved in facilitating advancement.

## I. Introduction

Anyone who wishes to acquire a new skill is immediately faced with two options.
He can, like a baby, pick it up by imitation and floundering trial-and-error, or
he can seek the aid of an instructor or instructional manual. The latter
approach is far more efficient, and in the case of dangerous activities, such as
aircraft piloting, essential. We shall describe below our model of the normal
directed skill acquisition process and illustrate our rather abstract
characterization with examples from foreign language acquisition, chess
learning, and flight instruction.

Our method consists in analyzing and systematizing descriptions of changes in
the perception of the task environment reported by performers in the course of
acquiring complex skills. Sudnow [1], trained as an ethnographer, has described
in great detail the changing stages in the meaning and temporal organization of
sound patterns in the course of his acquisition of the ability to improvise
jazz. We have adapted these findings to the stages in the acquisition of
facility in speaking a second language, since this form of skill acquisition is
likely to be more familiar to the reader. The psychologist De Groot [2] has
reported on the changing way the chess array is perceived by beginners and
experienced players. In our illustrations of our model with respect to flying,
we have relied on pilot interviews and instructional manuals.

This descriptive data, while precise and replicable, might seem to lack the
objectivity and quantifiability produced by controlled laboratory experiments.
However, there is a long tradition in psychology and philosophy of suspicion of
the significance of experimental results produced by restricting experiments to
precisely controlled but highly artificial situations. Gestaltists such as
Köhler [3] and phenomenologists such as Merleau-Ponty [4] have argued that
research programs such as behaviorism and cognitivism which attempt to eliminate
the everyday perceptual familiarity of the experimental situation reach their
conclustion that perception and skills etc. are based on the lawlike combination
of elements precisely because they have eliminated the contextual significance,
based on past experience, which makes other forms of response possible.
Moreover, recent research on judges setting bail and pronouncing sentences [4]
has shown that even the simple fact of the subject knowing that he is taking
part in a psychological experiment produces a marked change in behavior. In
laboratory settings, actual judges operated according to the recommended rules
of procedure found in various published guidelines. Unobstrusively observed in
the naturalistic courtroom setting, however, these same judges behaved quite
differently, relying heavily on the recoomendations of attorneys and probation
officers. Experience seems to have taught the judges to trust experts, rather
than apply rules. Concerning scientific laboratory observation as a means of
studying real-world behavior, Konečni and Ebbesen conclude "... erroneous
information obtained by scientific methods (and therefore having an aura of
truth) is more harmful than no information at all ..." [6]

Despite the intrinsic tendency of controlled experiments to produce behavior
which masks the changes in skilled performance which takes place over long
periods of experience, some indications of these changes have shown up even
under these adverse conditions. Schneider and Shiffrin have distinguished
controlled procesing -- a temporary activation of a sequence of elements that
can be set up quickly and easily but requires attention is capacity limited
(usually serial in nature) and is controlled by the subject -- from automatic
processing -- a learned sequence that is initiated by appropriate inputs and
then proceeds automatically without stressing the capacity limitations of the
system, and without necessarily demanding attention. They conclude, based on
experimental evidence involving very simple detection, search and attention
tasks, "In novel situations or in situations requiring moment-to-moment
decisions, controlled processing may be adopted and used to perform accurately,
though slowly. Then, as the situations become familiar, always requiring the
same sequence of processing operations, automatic processing will develop,
attention demands will be eased, other controlled operations can be carried out
in parallel with the automatic processing, and performance will improve" [7]

One further interesting recent result of laboratory research is the unexpected
discovery that when the same task can be described as a sequence of formal
operations, and alternatively as a familiar concrete problem, the subject's
behavior dramatically improves when he is presented the task in a concrete
everyday form. An abstract logical task involving a conditional rule was studied
extensively by Wason in 1966. Here is one example of the problem Wason studied
and his results:

> "You are presented with four cards showing, respectively, 'A', 'D', '4', '7',
> and you know from previous experience that every card, of which these are a
> subset, has a letter on one side and a number on the other side. You are then
> given this rule about the four cards in front of you: 'If a card has a vowel
> on one side, then it has an even number on the other side.'
>
> Next you are told: 'Your task is to say which of the cards you need to turn
> over in order to find out whether the rule is true or false.'
>
> The most frequent answers are 'A and 4' and 'only A'. They are both wrong. The
> right answer is 'A and 7' because if these two stimuli were to occur on the
> same card, then the rule would be false but otherwise it would be true. Very
> few highly intelligent S's get the answer right spontaneously; some take a
> considerable time to grasp it; a small minority even dispute its correctness,
> or at least remain puzzled by it ..." [8].

In 1972, it was demonstrated that the subject's performance dramatically
improves if the selection task relates more closely to his experience.

> "The subjects were instructed to imagine that they were postal workers engaged
> in sorting letters on a conveying belt; their task was to determine whether
> the following rule had been violated: 'If a letter is sealed, then it has a 5d
> stamp on it.' The material consisted of four envelopes arranged as follows:
> the back of a sealed envelope (p); the back of an unsealed envelope (~p); the
> front of an envelope with a 5d stamp on it (q); the front of an envelope with
> a 4d stamp on it (~q). The instructions were to select only those envelopes
> which definitely needed to be turned over to find out whether, or not, they
> violated the rule. There were twenty-four subjects and they performed the task
> under both this 'concrete' condition, and under an 'abstract' control
> condition in which arbitrary symbols were associated in the usual way. Under
> the 'concrete' condition twenty-two subjects were correct, and under the
> control, 'abstract' condition seven were correct" [9].

This striking dependence on _everyday_, _concrete_, _experience_ in problem
solving seems an anomaly from the point of view of the information processing
model of mental activity whose basic assumption is that all cognitive processes
are produced by _formal_ manipulation of independent bits of information
abstracted from the problem domain. Various attempts have been made to deal with
the above experimental results. Whether it is the concrete terms, or the
realistic relation between the terms, or a combination, that facilitates
performance is in disagreement, as is the explanatory nature of various proposed
information processing models. One fact seems clear, however, to the pioneering
investigators, Johnson-Laird and Wason:

> "The subjects' ordinary experience is relevant to problem solving performance,
> and our 'realistic guise' touches this experience" [10].

Our approach is to take the reliance on everyday familiarity in problem solving
not as an anomaly, but as a pervasive and essential feature of human intelligent
behavior. Therefore, in the account of skill acquisition which follows, concrete
experience plays a paramount role. Rather than adopting the currently accepted
Piagetian view that proficiency increases as one moves from the concrete to the
abstract, we argue that skill in its minimal form is produced by following
abstract formal rules, but that only experience with concrete cases can account
for higher levels of performance. Furthermore, if concrete experience is
necessary and sufficient for proficiency, then, as we indicate in sections
III-IV, one has the option of dispensing with any formal information processing
explanation of skill acquisition and can offer neurological speculations as
alternative explanations of skillful behavior.

A detailed understanding of the stages through which skillful performance
develops is essential if one is to design training programs and training
materials to facilitate the acquisition of high-order skills. In any such
endeavor, it is essential to identify at each stage what capacities the
performer has acquired and which more sophisticated capacity he is then in a
position to attain.

The five-stage process we present here is an elaboration and systematization of
the three stages identified in [11] and the additional stage introduced in [12].
The typography worked out in this paper forms the basis in a companion paper
[13] of a critical evaluation of a recent proposal [14] for the design of
procedures for training aircrew emergency decision skills.

## II. Stage 1: Novice

Normally, the instruction process begines by decomposing the task environment
into context-free _features_ which the beginner can recognize without benefit of
experience. We will call such features, which can be recognized without
experience of particular situaltions in the instructional domain,
_non-situational_. The beginner is then given _rules_ for determining an action
on the basis of these features. To improve, the novice needs monitoring, either
by self-observation or instructional feedback, so as to bring his behavior more
and more completely into conformity with the rule.

A student, acquiring a second language, would be classified as novice when he
had learned the phonetic rules for producing and recognizing what seemed to him
meaningless noises which got specific results when produced on specific
occasions. The novice chess player sees pieces as context-free elements and
knows a few simple rules such as the rule for computing the material value of a
position by adding up a matterial value he has learned to assign to each type of
piece. The novice pilot knows how to read cockpit instruments and how to
manipulate the controls in response to such features as instrument readings and
context-free visual cues such as the angular displacement of the horizon.

## III. Stage 2: Competence

Competence comes only after considerable experience actually coping with real
situaltions in which the student notes or an instructor points out recurrent
meaningful component patterns. These _situaltional_ components, in terms of
which a competent student understands his environment, are no longer the
context-free features used by the novice. We will call these recurrent patterns
_aspects_. Aspect recognition cannot be prduced by calling attention to
recurrent sets of features, but only by singing out perspicuous examples. The
brain-state correlated with the example being pointed out is organized and
stored in such a way as to provide a basis for future recognition of similar
aspects. While there is no in-principle argument proving that this organizing
and storing process could not take the form of abstract rules operating over
context-free features, there is not a shred of experimental evidence supporting
this contention. It seems more plausible, as argued in Reference [15], that what
is stored is simply a brain-state record in no way decomposed into "bits of
information." The instructor can formulate principles dictating actions in terms
of these aspects. We will call such principles, which presuppose
experience-based meaningful elements, _guidelines_. The guidelines treat all
aspects as equally important and are formulated so as to integrate as many
aspects as possible.

A language learner has achieved competence when he no longer hears and produces
meaningless stream of sound, but rather perceives meaningful phrases which, when
used on appropriate occasions, produce effects by virtue of these meanings. Some
typical chess aspects are "weakness of the king's side," "over-extended," and
"unbalanced pawn structure," and the competent player knows how to bring about
and diminish these aspencts, and which are to be sought and which avoided. The
competent pilot can recognize such aspects as "high in the landing approach
envelope," "verging on stall conditions," and "dangerous crab angle," and knows
guidelines for correcting such conditions.

## IV. Stage 3: Proficiency

Increased practice exposes the performer to a wide variety of typical whole
situations. Each whole situation, for the first time, has a meaning which is its
relevance to the achievement of a long-term goal. Aspects now appear to be more
or less important (salient) depending upon their relevance to this goal. The
brain-state correlated with the performer's experiencing a whole situation from
a particular perspective is organized and stored in such a way as to provide a
basis for future recognition of similar situations viewed from similar
perspectives. A specific objective situation, confronted at two different times,
each time from a different perspective, would be treated as two different
situations.[^1] Given a set of aspects and their saliences, the performer uses a
memorized principle which we call a _maxim_ to determine the appropriate action.

[^1]: For the first time, borderline situations can occur in which the appropriate perspective is in question. This phenomenon is dealt with in detail in Reference [13].

The language learner finally becomes able to combine the phrases he uses into
whole sentences, whith subordinate clauses, which enable him to describe whole
situations, and to use language to request, demand, order etc. whole states of
affairs. The chess player now sees aspects such as "unbalanced pawn structure"
as either irrelevant or crucial to some overall strategic goal, such as "attack"
or "play for a positional end-game advantage." Given his particular long-range
goal, he uses maxims to decide on moves which change the crucial aspects of his
position and that of this opponent's to his advantage. The proficient pilot,
intent, for example, on making a safe landing, sees his position in the landing
envelope and his crab angle as salient while ignoring the terrain beyond the far
end of the runway. He maneuvers down following maxims which dictate actions
which correct deviations from desired conditions. If the deviations become too
large he may adopt a different perspective in view of a possible "go around," in
terms of which the runway length and terrain beyond its far end become crucial.

## V. Stage 4: Expertise

The expert performer in a particular task environment has reached the final
stage in the step-wise improvement of mental processing which we have been
following. up to this stage, the performer needed some sort of analytical
principle (rule, guideline, maxim) to connect his gasp of the general situation
to a specific action. Now his repertire of experienced situations is so vast
that normally each specific situation immediately dictates an _intuitively_
appropriate action. This intuition is possible because each type of situation,
as distinguished in Section IV, now has associated with it a specific response.

After a great deal of experience actually using a language in everyday
situations, the language learner discovers that without his consciously using
any rules, situations simply elicit from him appropriate linguistic responses.
By virtue of previous experience with actual board positions or the involved
study of such positions, an appropriate move or tactical idea presents itself to
the chess expert each time he sees a meaningful chess array. The expert pilot,
having finally reached this non-analytical stage of performance, responds
intuitively and appropriately to his current situation. Pilots report that at
this stage, rather than being aware that they are flying an airplane, they have
the experience that they are flying. The magnitude and importance of this change
from analytic thought to intuitive response is evident to any expert pilot who
has had the experience of suddenly reflecting upon what he is doing, with an
accompaying degradation of his performance and the disconcerting realization
that rather than simply flying, he is controlling a complicated mechanism.

## VI. Stage 5: Mastery

Although, according to our model, there is no higher level of mental capacity
than expertise, the expert is capable of experiencing moments of intense
absorption in his work, during which his performance transcends even its usual
high level. We discuss this stage in Reference [12] where we note that this
masterful performance only takes place when the expert, who no longer needs
principles, can cease to pay conscious attention to his performance and can let
all the mental energy prevously used in monitoring his performance go into
producing almost instantaneously the appropriate perspective and its associated
action.

## VII. Summary and Training Implications

The above developmental description can be seen systematically as the result of
the successive transfformation of four mental functions. Each of the four mental
functions has a primitive and a sophisticated form and the functions are so
ordered that attaining the sophisticated form of each presupposes the prior
attainment of the sophisticated form of all those lower numbered in the
ordering. Each row in Table 1 represents a form of mental function. In column 1
all four forms are in their primitive state, and in each subsequent column, one
additional form has been transformed into its sophisticated state. As a result,
there are five columns, and each corredsponds to one of our five stages of ental
activity involved in skill acquisition.

| Mental Function / Skill Level |  NOVICE          |  COMPETENT   | PROFICIENT  | EXPERT      | MASTER      |
| ----------------------------- |  --------------- |  ----------- | ----------- | ----------- | ----------- |
| Recollection                  |  Non-situational |  Situational | Situational | Situational | Situational |
| Recognition                   |  Decomposed      |  Decomposed  | Holistic    | Holistic    | Holistic    |
| Decision                      |  Analytical      |  Analytical  | Analytical  | Intuitive   | Intuitive   |
| Awareness                     |  Monitoring      |  Monitoring  | Monitoring  | Monitoring  | Absorbed    |

Table 1

In reading the table, one should recall the following. The development depicted
in row 1 first becomes situational ewhen experience-based similarity recognition
is achieved. This first occurs when the performer is able to recognize aspects.
The development in row 2 first becomes holistic when the performer perceives
similarity in terms of whole situations. This chagne is accompanied by the
recognition of salience. In row 3, the performer refines whole situations to the
point that unique decisions intuitively accompany situation recognition without
need of conscious calculation. In row 4, the anlytical mind, relieved of its
monitoring role in producing and evaluating performance, it quieted so that the
performer can become completely absorbed in his performance.

The training implications of this taxonomy are obvious. The designer of training
aids and courses must at all times be aware of the developmental stage of the
student, so as to facilitate the trainee's advancement to the next stage, and to
avoid the temptation to introduce intricate and sophisticated aids which,
although they might improve performance at a particular level, would impede
advancement to a higher stage, or even encourage regression to a lower one.

## Reference

1.  Sudnow, David, WAYS OF THE HAND, THE ORGANIZATION OF IMPROVISED CONDUCT,
    Harvard University Press, Cambridge, Massachusetts, (1978).
2.  De Groot, Adriaan, THOUGHT AND CHOICE IN CHESS, Mouton, The Hague, The
    Netherlands, (1965).
3.  Köhler, Wolfgang, GESTALT PSYCHOLOGY, Mentor Book, New York, New York, pp.
    24-41 (1959).
4.  Merleau-Ponty, Maurice, PHENOMENOLOGY OF PERCEPTION, Routledge and Kegan
    Paul, London, England, (1962).
5.  Konečni, Vladimer and Ebbe Ebbesen, "External Validity of Research in Legal
    Psychology," to appear in Law and Human Behavior, (1980), avaiable from
    authors, Department of Psychology, University of California, San Diego,
    LaJolla, California, 92093.
6.  Ibid, pp. 54-55.
7.  Shiffrin, Richard and W. Schneider, "Controlled and Automatic Human
    Information Processing," Psychological Review, Vol. 84, Nos. 1 and 2, p.
    161, (January 1977 and March 1977).
8.  Johnson-Laird, P. N. and P. C. Wason, "A Theoretical Analysis of Insight
    into a Reasoning Task, Postscript," in THINKING, ed. by Johnson-Laird and
    Wason, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, England, pp. 143-144, (1977).
9.  Ibid, p. 152.
10. Ibid, p. 153.
11. Dreyfus, Stuart E. and Hubert L. Dreyfus, "The Scope, Limits, and Training
    Implications of Three Models of Aircraft Pilot Emergency Response Behavior,"
    ORC 79-2, Operations Research Center, University of California, Berkeley,
    (1979).
12. Dreyfus, Hubert L. and Stuart E. Dreyfus, "The Psychic Boom: Flying Beyond
    the Thought Barrier," ORC 79-3, Operations Research Center, University of
    California, Berkeley, (1979).
13. Dreyfus, Hubert L. and Stuart E. Dreyfus, "Proficient Adaptable Response to
    Emergencies Caused by Identifiable Malfunctions: Contrasting Training
    Implications of Two Proposed Models," ORC 80-3, Operations Research Center,
    University of California, Berkeley, (1980).
14. Hopf-Weichel, R. et al., "Aircraft Emergency Decisions: Cognitive and
    Situational Variables," Perceptronics Technical Report PATR-1065-79-7, (July
    1979).
15. Dreyfus, Stuart E. and Hubert L. Dreyfus, "The Scope, Limits, and Training
    Implications of Three Models of Aircraft Pilot Emergency Response Behavior,"
    ORC 79-2, Operations Research Center, University of California, Berkeley,
    pp. 23-28, (1979).